# Implementation of generic resource load

- Starting point: fully working application from last week - triangle with changing color, controlled by callback.
- Finish line: new modular program, that is able to load and display externally provided models and shaders. The refactoring should make code much cleaner, because all shader related functions and model related functions will be managed by its own class.

How it may look like:

```C++
#include <unordered_map>
class App {
    ...
protected:
    // all objects of the scene addressable by name
    std::unordered_map<std::string, Model> scene; 
}

void App::init_assets(void) {
    // Notice: code massively simplified - all moved to specific classes

    // shader: load, compile, link, initialize params
    // (may be moved to global variables - if all models use same shader)
    ShaderProgram my_shader = ShaderProgram("resources/basic.vert", "resources/basic.frag");
    
    // model: load model file, assign shader used to draw a model
    Model my_model = Model("resources/objects/whatever.obj", my_shader);

    // put model to scene
    scene.push_back("my_first_object", my_model); 
}


App::init() {
    ...
    init();
    init_assets(); // first init OpenGL, THAN init assets: valid context MUST exist  

}   

App::run() {

    glm::vec4 my_rgba = ...

    while(!glfwWindowShouldClose(window))
    {
        glClear(GL_COLOR_BUFFER_BIT | GL_DEPTH_BUFFER_BIT);       
        ...
        
        // set shader uniforms once (if all models use same shader)
        my_shader.activate();
        my_shader.setUniform("my_color", my_rgba);
        
        // draw all models in the scene
        for (auto const& model : scene) {
            if (model.name == "redbox") // per model setting
                model.shader.setUniform("color", red);
            model.draw();
        }
 
        ...
        // end of frame
        glfwSwapBuffers();
    }

}

App::~App() {
    // clean-up
    my_shader.clear();
    other_shader.clear();
    ...
        
    std::cout << "Bye...\n";
}

```

## Task 1: Generic shader loader - directory __01 shader class__

- Current state: shader hard-coded into .cpp source file
- Target: two external files (suffixes .vert for vertex shader, .frag for fragment shader; if you use different suffixes, Visual Studio GLSL plugin can not perform syntax check and highlighting). Implemented class, that will load both shader files files, and get shader program ready. Create functions to set uniform variables for CPU-GPU communication.

1. Copy partially implemented shader class (ShaderProgram.cpp, .hpp) into your project directory and Add-as-existing-file (Shift-Alt-A, or RMB on Solution explorer).
2. Use the lecture to implement missing parts - marked as "TODO"

### Task 1b (OPTIONAL): More efficient shader class - implementing LRU cache

- Let's imagine, that you have multiple objects drawn by few different shader programs. That requires switching to correct shader program before you draw each object. However, if the last activated shader program is the same as shoud be the new selected one, it is not necessary to call __glUseProgram()__ and you will save one drawcall.

```text
ShaderProgram_cached.hpp_snippet
```

### Task 1c (OPTIONAL): More efficent shader class - implementing name cache

- When using variants of function

    ```C++
    void setUniform(const std::string & name, const ... );
    ```

    from provided class, it is necessary to look for uniform location using function

    ```C++
     void glGetUniformLocation(const GLuint shader_program, const char * name);
    ```

    That works, but it is inefficient, because it is a drawcall (request for OpenGL drivers). Better solution is to create hash map of all possible pairs variable_name-location right after shader compilation. Than, you can quicky look for location (or verify non-existent variable name).

```text
uniform_location_caching.cpp_snippet
```

## Task 2: Explore directory __02 shader examples__

- see directory description, and explore the shader functionality
- some functions will be used in following lectures

## Task 3: Simple generic model loader - directory __03 vertex-mesh-model class__

- Current state: triangle vertex data are hard-coded into .hpp file
- Resources: in directory _04cv - shader-vertex-mesh-model/04 loading assets_ you can find file __triangle.obj__ with following content:

    ```text
    g triangle
    v  0.0  0.5 0.0
    v  0.5 -0.5 0.0
    v -0.5 -0.5 0.0
    
    vt 0.0 0.0
    vt 1.0 0.0
    vt 1.0 1.0

    vn 0.0 0.0 1.0

    f 1/1/1 2/2/1 3/2/1
    ```

    this defines exactly same triangle as in previous Lab, only now it is in Wavefront Object File (see <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wavefront_.obj_file> ).
    The triangle now uses texture coordinates and normal, that you should ignore for now.

- Target: implemented class that will load .OBJ file, parse the content and create VAO, VBO, set parameters etc., so the triangle data will be stored outside the source code. Use also __EBO__ (see lectures) for indirect vertex addressing.

1. Modify your __assets.hpp__, so that vertex structure contains normal and texture coordinate.
2. Copy partially implemented classes (Mesh.hpp, Model.hpp) into your project directory and Add-as-existing-file (Shift-Alt-A, or RMB on Solution explorer).
3. Explore OBJloader.cpp and OBJloader.hpp from __04 loading assets__, that can  load OBJ file. The loader is simple and limited: it expects, that model in .OBJ file __allways contains texture coordinates and normals, and uses triangles__. Notice, that _loadOBJ()_ function returns three separate vectors - verify the data and fill vector of vertices and vector of indices, so that you can create VAO, VBO, EBO.
4. Use the lecture to implement missing parts - marked as "TODO". Fully setup and initialize VAO. __Use DSA.__
5. Draw the triangle.

### Task 3a (OPTIONAL): Modify and extend the functionality of OBJ loader

- Loader expects triangles. Modify it, so that if it finds Quad, it will break it in two triangles.
- Loader expects normals coordinates. Modify it, so that if no normals are found, it will calculate it: for triangle, it is

```C++
glm::vec3 normal = glm::normalize(glm::cross(glm::vec3(point1)-glm::vec3(point0), glm::vec3(point2) - glm::vec3(point0)));
```

- Loader expects texture coordinates. Modify it, so that if no texcoords are found, it will provide fake fixed coordinate glm::vec2(0.0)

### Task 3b (superOPTIONAL): Meshlab

Download Meshlab, load some model, try to convert it to .OBJ format. Try other functions.
